When you sally upon him,speak what terrible language you will
though you understand itnot yourselves, no matter;
for we must not seem tounderstand him,
unless some one among us
whom we must produce foran interpreter.
Good captain, let me bethe interpreter.
Art not acquainted with him?knows he not thy voice?
No, sir, I warrant you.
But what linsey-woolsey hastthou to speak to us again?
E'en such as you speakto me.
He must think us some bandof strangers
i' the adversary'sentertainment.
Now he hath a smack of allneighbouring languages;
therefore we must every onebe a man of his own fancy,
not to know what we speakone to another;
that we seem to know, is toknow straight our purpose:
choughs' language, gabbleenough, and good enough.
As for you, interpreter,you must seem very politic.
But couch, ho!
here he comes,
to beguile two hours in asleep,
and then to return andswear the lies he forges.
Ten o'clock: within thesethree hours
'twill be time enough togo home.
What shall I say I havedone?
It must be a very plausiveinvention that carries it:
they begin to smoke me;
and disgraces have of lateknocked too often at my door.
I find my tongue is toofoolhardy;
but my heart hath the fearof Mars before it
not daring the reports ofmy tongue.
This is the first truth
that e'er thine own tonguewas guilty of.
What the devil should moveme to undertake
the recovery of this drum,
being not ignorant of theimpossibility,
and knowing I had no suchpurpose?
Is it possible he shouldknow what he is,
and be that he is?
I would I had any drum ofthe enemy's:
I would swearI recovered it.
You shall hear one anon.
(drummng sounds)
A drum now of theenemy's,--
Throca movousus, cargo,cargo, cargo.
Boskos thromuldo boskos.
I know you are the Muskos'regiment:
And I shall lose my lifefor want of language;
If there be here German,or Dane, low Dutch,
Italian, or French, lethim speak to me;
I'll discover that whichshall undo the Florentine.
Boskos vauvado:
I understand thee, and canspeak thy tongue.
Kerely bonto,
Manka revania dulche.
Oscorbidulchos volivorco.
The general is content tospare thee yet;
And, hoodwink'd as thouart, will lead thee on
To gather from thee: haplythou mayst inform
Something to save thylife.
O, let me live!
And all the secrets of ourcamp I'll show,
Their force, theirpurposes; nay,
I'll speak that which youwill wonder at.
They told me that yourname was Fontibell.
No, my good lord, Diana.
Titled goddess;
And worth it, withaddition!
But, fair soul,
In your fine frame hathlove no quality?
If quick fire of youthlight not your mind,
You are no maiden, but amonument:
When you are dead,
you should be such a oneas you are now,
for you are cold and stem;
And now you should be asyour mother was
When your sweet selfwas got.
She then was honest.
So should you be.
No:
My mother did but duty;such, my lord,
As you owe to your wife.
No more o' that;
I prithee, do not striveagainst my vows:
I was compell'd to her;
but I love thee by love'sown sweet constraint,
and will for ever do theeall rights of service.
Ay, so you serve us tillwe serve you;
but when you have ourroses,
You barely leave ourthorns to prick ourselves
And mock us with ourbareness.
How have I sworn!
'Tis not the many oathsthat makes the truth,
But the plain single vowthat is vow'd true.
What is not holy, that weswear not by,
But take the High'st towitness:
then, pray you,tell me,
If I should swear by God'sgreat attributes,
I loved you dearly, wouldyou believe my oaths,
When I did love you ill?This has no holding,
To swear by him whom Iprotest to love,
That I will work againsthim: therefore your oaths
Are words and poorconditions, but unseal'd,
At least in my opinion.
Change it, change it;
Be not so holy-cruel: loveis holy;
And my integrity ne'erknew the crafts
that you do chargemen with.
Stand no more off,
But give thyself unto mysick desires,
Who then recover: say thouart mine,
and ever my love as itbegins shall so persever.
I see that men make ropesin such a scarre
That we'll forsakeourselves.
Give me that ring.
I'll lend it thee, mydear;
but have no power to giveit from me.
Will you not, my lord?
It is an honour 'longingto our house,
Bequeathed down from manyancestors;
Which were the greatestobloquy i' the world
In me to lose.
Mine honour's such a ring:
My chastity's the jewel ofour house,
Bequeathed down from manyancestors;
Which were the greatestobloquy i' the world
In me to lose: thus yourown proper wisdom
Brings in the championHonour on my part,
Against your vain assault.
Here, take my ring:
My house, mine honour,yea, my life, be thine,
And I'll be bid by thee.
When midnight comes, knockat my chamber-window:
I'll order take my mothershall not hear.
Now will I charge you inthe band of truth,
When you have conquer'd myyet maiden bed,
Remain there but an hour,nor speak to me:
My reasons are most strong;and you shall know them
When back again this ringshall be deliver'd:
And on your finger in thenight
I'll put a nother ring,that what in time proceeds
May token to the futureour past deeds.
Adieu, till then; then,fail not.
You have won a wife of me,
though there my hope bedone.
A heaven on earth I havewon by wooing thee.
For which live long tothank both heaven and me!
You may so in the end.
My mother told me just howhe would woo,
As if she sat in 's heart;she says all men
Have the like oaths:
he had sworn to marry mewhen his wife's dead;
Therefore I'll lie withhim when I am buried.
Since Frenchmen are sobraid,
Marry that will, I liveand die a maid:
Only in this disguise Ithink't no sin
To cozen him that wouldunjustly win.
You have not given him hismother's letter?
I have delivered it anhour since:
there is something in'tthat stings his nature;
for on the reading it hechanged almost intoanother man.
He has much worthy blamelaid upon him
for shaking off so good awife and so sweet a lady.
Especially he hathincurred
the everlastingdispleasure of the king,
who had even tuned his bountyto sing happiness to him.
I will tell you a thing,
but you shall let it dwelldarkly with you.
When you have spoken it,'tis dead,
and I am the grave of it.
He hath perverted a younggentlewoman here in Florence,
of a most chaste renown;
and this night he flesheshis will
in the spoil of herhonour:
he hath given her hismonumental ring,
and thinks himself made inthe unchaste composition.
Now, God delay ourrebellion!
as we are ourselves, whatthings are we!
Merely our own traitors.
And as in the commoncourse of all treasons,
we still see them revealthemselves,
till they attain to theirabhorred ends,
so he that in this actioncontrives
against his own nobility,
in his proper streamo'erflows himself.
Is it not meant damnablein us,
to be trumpeters of ourunlawful intents?
We shall not then have hiscompany to-night?
Not till after midnight; forhe is dieted to his hour.
That approaches apace;
I would gladly have him seehis company anatomized,
that he might take a measureof his own judgments,
wherein so curiously hehad set this counterfeit.
We will not meddle withhim till he come;
for his presence must bethe whip of the other.
In the mean time, whathear you of these wars?
I hear there is anoverture of peace.
Nay, I assure you, a peaceconcluded.
What will Count Rousillondo then?
will he travel higher, orreturn again into France?
I perceive, by thisdemand,
you are not altogether ofhis council.
Let it be forbid, sir;
so should I be a greatdeal of his act.
Sir, his wife some two monthssince fled from his house:
her pretence is a pilgrimageto Saint Jaques le Grand;
which holy undertaking
with most austere sanctimonyshe accomplished;
and, there residing thetenderness of her nature
became as a prey to hergrief;
in fine, made a groan ofher last breath,
and now she sings inheaven.
How is this justified?
The stronger part of it byher own letters,
which makes her storytrue,
even to the point of herdeath: her death itself,
which could not be heroffice to say is come,
was faithfully confirmed bythe rector of the place.
Hath the count all thisintelligence?
Ay, and the particularconfirmations,
point from point, so to thefull arming of the verity.
I am heartily sorry thathe'll be glad of this.
How mightily sometimes we makeus comforts of our losses!
And how mightily someother times
we drown our gain intears!
The great dignity that hisvalour hath here acquiredfor him
shall at home be encounteredwith a shame as ample.
The web of our life is ofa mingled yarn,
good and ill together:
our virtues would beproud,
if our faults whipped themnot;
and our crimes woulddespair,
if they were not cherishedby our virtues.
How now my lord ! it'snot after midnight?
I have to-night dispatchedsixteen businesses,
a month's length a-piece,
I have congied with theduke,
done my adieu with hisnearest;
buried a wife, mournedfor her;
writ to my lady mother Iam returning;
entertained my convoy;
and between these mainparcels of dispatch
effected many nicer needs;
the last was the greatest,
but that I have not endedyet.
If the business be of anydifficulty,
and this morning yourdeparture hence,
it requires haste of yourlordship.
I mean, the business isnot ended,
as fearing to hear of ithereafter.
But shall we have thisdialogue
between the fool and thesoldier?
Come, bring forth thiscounterfeit module,
he has deceived me, like adouble-meaning prophesier.
Bring him forth:
has sat i' the stocks allnight, poor gallant knave.
No matter: his heels havedeserved it,
in usurping his spurs solong.
How does he carry himself?
I have told your lordshipalready,
the stocks carry him.
But to answer you as youwould be understood;
he weeps like a wench thathad shed her milk:
he hath confessed himselfto Morgan,
whom he supposes to be afriar,
from the time of hisremembrance
to this very instantdisaster of his setting i'the stocks:
and what think you he hathconfessed?
Nothing of me, has a'?
His confession is taken,
and it shall be read tohis face:
if your lordship be in't,as I believe you are,
you must have the patienceto hear it.
A plague upon him!muffled! he can saynothing of me:
hush, hush!
Hoodman comes!
Portotartarosa
He calls for the tortures:
what will you say without'em?
I will confess what I knowwithout constraint:
if ye pinch me like apasty, I can say no more.
Bosko chimurcho.
Boblibindo chicurmurco.
You are a mercifulgeneral.
Our general bids youanswer
to what I shall ask youout of a note.
And truly, as I hopeto live.
First demand of him how manyhorse the duke is strong.'
What say you to that?
Five or six thousand; butvery weak and unserviceable:
the troops are allscattered,
and the commanders verypoor rogues,
upon my reputation and creditand as I hope to live.
Shall I set down youranswer so?
Do: I'll take thesacrament on't,
how and which wayyou will.
All's one to him. What apast-saving slave is this!
You're deceived, my lord:this is Monsieur Parolles,
the gallant militarist,--thatwas his own phrase,
that had the whole theoric ofwar in the knot of his scarf,
and the practise in thechape of his dagger.
I will never trust a managain
for keeping hissword clean.
nor believe he can haveevery thing in him
by wearing his apparelneatly.
Well, that's set down.
Five or six thousandhorse, I said
I will say true,orthereabouts,
set down, for I'll speaktruth.
He's very near the truthin this.
But I con him no thanksfor't,
in the nature he deliversit.
'Demand of him, of whatstrength they are a-foot.'
What say you to that?
By my troth, sir,
if I were to live thispresent hour, I will telltrue.
Let me see: Spurio, ahundred and fifty;
Sebastian, so many;Corambus, so many; Jaques,so many;
Guiltian, Cosmo, Lodowick,and Gratii,
two hundred and fiftyeach;
mine own company,Chitopher, Vaumond,Bentii,
two hundred and fiftyeach: so that themuster-file,
rotten and sound, upon mylife,
amounts not to fifteenthousand poll;
half of the which dare notshake snow
from off their cassocks,
lest they shake themselvesto pieces.
What shall be done to him?
Nothing, but let him havethanks.
Bollybingo agranoche
Demand of him mycondition,
and what credit I havewith the duke.
Well, that's set down.
'You shall demand of him,
whether one Captain Dumainbe i' the camp,
a Frenchman; what hisreputation is with theduke;
what his valour, honesty,and expertness in wars;
or whether he thinks itwere not possible,
with well-weighing sums ofgold,
to corrupt him to revolt.'
What say you to this? whatdo you know of it?
I beseech you,
let me answer to the particularof the inter'gatories:
demand them singly.
Do you know this CaptainDumain?
I know him: a' was abotcher's 'prentice in Paris,
from whence he was whipped
for getting the shrieve'sfool with child,
a dumb innocent, thatcould not say him nay.
Nay, stay! Hold yourhands, by your leave,
Though I know his brains
are forfeit to the nexttile that falls.
Well, is this captain in theduke of Florence's camp?
Upon my knowledge, he is,and lousy.
Nay look not so upon me;we shall hear of yourlordship anon.
What is his reputationwith the duke?
The duke knows him for noother but a poor officerof mine;
and writ to me this other dayto turn him out o' the band:
I think I have his letterin my pocket.
Marry, we'll search.
In good sadness, I do notknow; either it is there,
or it is upon a file
with the duke's other lettersin my tent.
Here 'tis; here's a paper:shall I read it to you?
I do not know if it be itor no.
Our interpreter does itwell.
Excellently.
'Dian, the count's a fool,and full of gold,'--
That is not the duke'sletter, sir;
that is an advertisement toa proper maid in Florence,
one Diana,
to take heed of the allurementof one Count Rousillon,
a foolish idle boy, butfor all that very ruttish:
I pray you, sir, put it upagain.
Nay, I'll read it first,by your favour.
My meaning in't,
I protest, was very honestin the behalf of the maid;
for I knew the young count
to be a dangerous andlascivious boy,
who is a whale tovirginity
and devours up all the fryit finds.
Damnable both-sides rogue!
'When he swears oaths, bidhim drop gold, and take it;
After he scores, he neverpays the score:
Half won is match well made;match, and well make it;
He ne'er pays after-debts,take it before;
And say a soldier, Dian,told thee this,
Men are to mell with, boysare not to kiss:
For count of this, thecount's a fool, I know it,
Who pays before, but notwhen he does owe it.
Thine, as he vowed to theein thine ear, Parolles.'
He shall be whippedthrough the army
with this rhyme in'sforehead.
This is your devotedfriend, sir,
the manifold linguist andthe armipotent soldier.
I could endure any thingbefore but a cat,
and now he's a cat to me.
I perceive, sir, by thegeneral's looks,
we shall be fain to hangyou.
My life, sir, in any case:not that I am afraid to die;
but that, my offencesbeing many,
I would repent out theremainder of nature:
let me live, sir, in adungeon,
i' the stocks, or anywhere,
so I may live.
We'll see what may be done,so you confess freely;
therefore, once more tothis Captain Dumain:
what is his honesty?
he will lie, sir, withsuch volubility,
that you would think truthwere a fool:
What's his brother, theother Captain Dumain?
Why does be ask him of me?
What's he?
E'en a crow o' the samenest;
he excels his brother fora coward,
yet his brother is reputedone of the best that is:
If your life be saved,
will you undertake tobetray the Florentine?
Ay, and the captain of hishorse, Count Rousillon.
I'll whisper with the general,and know his pleasure.
I'll no more drumming; aplague of all drums!
Only to seem to deservewell,
and to beguile thesupposition
of that lasciviousyoung boy
the count, have I run intothis danger.
Yet who would havesuspected an ambush
where I was taken?
There is no remedy, sir,but you must die:
the general says, you thathave so traitorously
discovered the secrets ofyour army and made such
pestiferous reports of menvery nobly held,
can serve the world for nohonest use;
therefore you must die.
Come, headsman, off withhis head.
O Lord, sir, let me live,or let me see my death!
That shall you, and take yourleave of all your friends.
look about you: know youany here?
Good morrow, noblecaptain.
God bless you, CaptainParolles.
God save you, noblecaptain.
Captain, what greetingwill you to my Lord Lafeu?
I am for France.
Good captain, will you giveme a copy of the sonnet
you writ to Diana in behalfof the Count Rousillon?
an I were not a very coward,I'ld compel it of you:
but fare you well.
You are undone, captain,all but your scarf;
that has a knot on't yet
Who cannot be crushed witha plot?
If you could find out acountry
where but women were thathad received so much shame,
you might begin animpudent nation.
Fare ye well, sir; I amfor France too:
we shall speak of youthere.
Yet am I thankful: if myheart were great,
'Twould burst at this.Captain I'll be no more;
But I will eat and drink,and sleep as soft
As captain shall: simplythe thing I am
Shall make me live. Whoknows himself a braggart,
Let him fear this, for itwill come to pass
that every braggart shallbe found an ass.
Rust, sword? cool, blushes!and, Parolles, live
Safest in shame! beingfool'd, by foolery thrive!
There's place and meansfor every man alive.
I'll after them.
That you may well perceiveI have not wrong'd you,
One of the greatest in theChristian world
Shall be my surety; 'forewhose throne 'tis needful,
Ere I can perfect mineintents, to kneel:
Time was, I did him adesired office,
Dear almost as his life
You must know I amsupposed dead:
the army breaking,
My husband hies him home;where, heaven aiding,
And by the leave of mygood lord the king,
We'll be before ourwelcome.
Gentle madam,
You never had a servant towhose trust
Your business was morewelcome.
Nor you, mistress,
Ever a friend whosethoughts more truly labour
To recompense your love:doubt not but heaven
Hath brought me up to beyour daughter's dower,
As it hath fated her to bemy motive
And helper to a husband.But, O strange men!
That can such sweet usemake of what they hate,
But more of thishereafter. You, Diana,
Under my poor instructionsyet must suffer
Something in my behalf.
Let death and honesty
Go with your impositions,I am yours
Upon your will to suffer.
Yet, I pray you:
But with the word the timewill bring on summer,
When briers shall haveleaves as well as thorns,
And be as sweet as sharp.We must away;
Our wagon is prepared, andtime revives us:
All's well that ends well;still the fine's the crown;
Whate'er the course, theend is the renown.
No, no, no, your son wasmisled with a snipt-taffeta
fellow there, whosevillanous saffron
would have made all theunbaked and doughy youth
of a nation in his colour:
your daughter-in-law hadbeen alive at this hour,
and your son here at home,
more advanced by the king
than by that red-tailedhumble-bee I speak of.
I would I had not knownhim;
it was the death of themost virtuous gentlewoman
that ever nature hadpraise for creating.
If she had partaken ofmy flesh,
and cost me the dearestgroans of a mother,
I could not have owed hera more rooted love.
'Twas a good lady, 'twas agood lady:
we may pick a thousandsalads
ere we light on suchanother herb.
Indeed, sir, she was thesweet marjoram of the salad,
or rather, the herb ofgrace.
They are not herbs, youknave; they arenose-herbs.
I am no greatNebuchadnezzar, sir;
I have not much skill ingrass.
Whether dost thou professthyself, a knave or a fool?
A fool, sir, at a woman'sservice,
and a knave ata man's.
Your distinction?
I would cozen the man of hiswife and do his service.
So you were a knave at hisservice, indeed.
And I would give his wifemy bauble, sir, to do herservice.
I will subscribe for thee,thou art both knave and fool.
At your service.
No, no, no.
Why, sir, if I cannotserve you,
I can serve as great aprince as you are.
What prince is that?
The black prince, sir;alias,
the prince of darkness;alias, the devil.
Hold thee, there's mypurse:
I give thee not this tosuggest thee
from thy master thoutalkest of;
serve him still.
I am a woodland fellow,sir,
that always loved a greatfire;
and the master I speak ofever keeps a good fire.
But, sure, he is theprince of the world;
let his nobility remainin's court.
I am for the house withthe narrow gate,
which I take to be.toolittle for pomp to enter:
some that humblethemselves may;
but the many will be toochill and tender,
and they'll be for theflowery way
that leads to the broadgate and the great fire.
A shrewd knave and anunhappy.
So he is.
My late lord that's gonemade himself much sportout of him:
by his authority heremains here,
which he thinks is apatent for his sauciness;
and, indeed, he has nopace, but runs where hewill.
I like him well; 'tis notamiss.
And I was about to tellyou,
since I heard of the goodlady's death
and that my lord your sonwas upon his return home,
I moved his majesty tospeak in the behalf of mydaughter;
which, in the minority ofthem both, his majesty,
out of a self-graciousremembrance, did firstpropose:
his highness hath promisedme to do it:
and, to stop up thedispleasure
he hath conceived againstyour son,
there is no fitter matter.
How does your ladyshiplike it?
With very much content
and I wish it happilyeffected.
His highness will be heretomorrow
of as able body as when henumbered thirty:
It rejoices me, that I hopeI shall see him ere I die.
I have letters that my sonwill be here this evening
and I shall beseech yourlordship to remain me tillthey meet together.
Madam, I was thinking withwhat manners I mightsafely be admitted.
You need but plead yourhonourable privilege.
Lady, of that I have madea bold charter;
but I thank my God itholds yet.
O madam, yonder's my lordyour son
Let us go see your son, Ipray you:
I long to talk with theyoung noble soldier.